Typelevel Native blog post (#397)
typelevel/typelevel.github.com: collections/_posts/2022-09-19-typelevel-native.md

---
layout: post
title: Typelevel Native
category: technical

meta:
  nav: blog
  author: armanbilge
---

We recently published several major Typelevel projects for the [Scala Native] platform, most notably [Cats Effect], [FS2], and [http4s]. This blog post explores what this new platform means for the Typelevel ecosystem as well as how it works under-the-hood.

### What is Scala Native?

[Scala Native] is an optimizing ahead-of-time compiler for the Scala language. Put simply: it enables you to **compile Scala code directly to native executables**.

> It is an ambitious project following in the steps of [Scala.js]. Instead of targeting JavaScript, the Scala Native compiler targets the [LLVM] IR and uses its toolchain to generate native executables for a range of architectures, including x86, ARM, and in the near future web assembly.

Reviewer: > in the near future web assembly.

Is there an up to date issue tracking this progress we could perhaps link to? Everything I could find seems to be about 4 years old.

### Why is this exciting?

**For Scala in general**, funnily enough I think [GraalVM Native Image] does a great job summarizing the advantages of native executables, namely:
* instant startup that immediately achieves peak performance, without requiring warmup or the heavy footprint of the JVM
* packagable into small, self-contained binaries for easy deployment and distribution

It is worth mentioning that in benchmarks Scala Native handily beats GraalVM Native Image on startup time, runtime footprint, and binary size.

Moreover, breaking free from the JVM is an opportunity to design a runtime specifically optimized for the Scala language itself. This is the true potential of the Scala Native project.

**For Typelevel in particular**, Scala Native opens new doors for leveling up our ecosystem. Our flagship libraries are largely designed for deploying high performance I/O-bounded microservices and for the first time ever **we now have direct access to kernel I/O APIs**.

> I am also enthusiastic to use Cats Effect with (non-Scala) native libraries that expose a C API. [`Resource`] and more generally [`MonadCancel`] are powerful tools for safely navigating manual memory management with all the goodness of error-handling and cancelation.

Reviewer: > `Resource` and more generally `MonadCancel` are powerful tools for safely navigating manual memory management with all the goodness of error-handling and cancelation.

I think there could be a whole followup post or talk on leveraging this :wink:.

*I have nothing to do for the next 3 seconds. So wake me up then, or earlier if there is an incoming I/O event that I should handle. But wake me up no later!*

*Oh, and don’t forget to tell me whether there are still outstanding I/O events (`true`) or not (`false`) so I know if I need to call you again. Thanks!*

With tasks, timers, and the capability to poll for I/O, we can express the event loop algorithm. A single iteration of the loop looks like this:

1. Check the current time and execute any expired timers.

2. Execute up to 64 tasks, or until there are none left. We limit to 64 to ensure we are fair to timers and I/O.

3. Poll for I/O events. There are three cases to consider:
  - **There is at least one task to do.** Call `poll(0.nanos)`, so it will process any available I/O events and then immediately return control.
  - **There is at least one outstanding timer**. Call `poll(durationToNextTimer)`, so it will sleep until the next I/O event arrives or the timeout expires, whichever comes first.
  - **There are no tasks to do and no outstanding timers.**  Call `poll(Duration.Infinite)`, so it will sleep until the next I/O event arrives.

> This algorithm is not a Cats Effect original: the [libuv event loop] works in essentially the same way. It is however a first step towards to the much grander Cats Effect [I/O Integrated Runtime Concept]. The big idea is that every `WorkerThread` in the `WorkStealingThreadPool` that underpins the Cats Effect JVM runtime can run an event loop exactly like the one described above, for exceptionally high-performance I/O.

Reviewer: extra "to"
```suggestion
This algorithm is not a Cats Effect original: the [libuv event loop] works in essentially the same way. It is however a first step toward the much grander Cats Effect [I/O Integrated Runtime Concept]. The big idea is that every `WorkerThread` in the `WorkStealingThreadPool` that underpins the Cats Effect JVM runtime can run an event loop exactly like the one described above, for exceptionally high-performance I/O.
```

On macOS and BSDs the [kqueue] API plays an analogous role to epoll. We will not talk about Windows today :)

**Long story short, I did not want the FS2 codebase to absorb all of this cross-OS complexity.** So in collaboration with Lee Tibbert we repurposed my cheeky [epollcat] experiment into an actual library implementing JDK NIO APIs (specifically, [`AsynchronousSocketChannel`] and friends). Since these are the same APIs used by the JVM implementation of `fs2-io`, it actually enables the `Socket` code to be completely shared with Native.

[epollcat] implements an `EpollExecutorScheduler` for Linux and a `KqueueExecutorScheduler` for macOS. They additionally provide an API for monitoring a socket file descriptor for read-ready and write-ready events.

```scala
def monitor(fd: Int, reads: Boolean, writes: Boolean)(
  cb: EventNotificationCallback
): Runnable // returns a `Runnable` to un-monitor the file descriptor

trait EventNotificationCallback {
  def notifyEvents(readReady: Boolean, writeReady: Boolean): Unit
}
```

These are then used to implement the callback-based `read` and `write` methods of the JDK `AsynchronousSocketChannel`.

> It is worth pointing out that the JVM actually implements `AsynchronousSocketChannel` with an event loop as well. The difference is that on the JVM, this event loop is used only for I/O and runs on a separate thread from the compute pool used for fibers and the scheduler thread used for timers. Meanwhile, epollcat is an example of an I/O integrated runtime where fibers, timers, and I/O are all interleaved on a single thread.

Reviewer: To check my understanding, on the JVM:
- one thread running event loop which is used for only I/O
- another thread for compute pool used for cats-effect fibers
- another thread for the cats-effect scheduler used for cats-effect timers

Author: Yes, right!

> another thread for compute pool used for cats-effect fibers

Yes, actually the WSTP enforces at least two threads.

> It is worth pointing out that the JVM actually implements `AsynchronousSocketChannel` with an event loop as well. The difference is that on the JVM, this event loop is used only for I/O and runs on a separate thread from the compute pool used for fibers and the scheduler thread used for timers. Meanwhile, epollcat is an example of an I/O integrated runtime where fibers, timers, and I/O are all interleaved on a single thread.

Reviewer: > epollcat is an example of an I/O integrated runtime where fibers, timers, and I/O are all interleaved on a single thread

Is it too early to comment on why this might be a better setup for cats-effect? Might it mean less thread switching?

edit: Is it perhaps worth linking to https://github.com/typelevel/cats-effect/discussions/3070 ?

Author: Yes, I linked to this the first time that it's mentioned. I can link again here.

* Developing I/O-integrated runtimes:
  - [epollcat] supports Linux and macOS and has plenty of opportunity for optimization and development.
  - A [libuv]-based runtime would have solid cross-OS support, including Windows. Prior art in [scala-native-loop].
  - Personally I am excited to work on an [io_uring] runtime.

* Tooling. Anton Sviridov has spear-headed two major projects in this area:
  - [sbt-vcpkg] is working hard to solve the native dependency problem.
  - [sn-bindgen] generates Scala Native bindings to native libraries directly from `*.h` header files. I found it immensely useful while working on http4s-curl, epollcat, and the s2n-tls integration in FS2.
  - Also: we are _badly_ in need of a pure Scala port of the [Java Microbenchmark Harness]. Not the whole thing obviously, but just enough to run the existing Cats Effect benchmarks for example.

* Scala Native itself. Lots to do there!

### Ember native benchmark

```console
$ hey -z 30s http://localhost:8080

Summary:
  Total:    30.0160 secs
  Slowest:    0.3971 secs
  Fastest:    0.0012 secs
  Average:    0.0131 secs

>   Requests/sec:    3815.4647

Reviewer 2: It might be useful to show what kind of performance the same program gives on the JVM. Without any reference any number about `Requests/sec` doesn't convey much information.
